								   
Epilogue
========



Final Recommendations
---------------------

My final recommendation are

   * Save often.

   * Spring for Grayson's book.

   * Save often.

   * Please report problems.



Acknowledgments
----------------

First thanks to HP for assigning the rights of PAGE to me which allows
me to make this available to the Python community.

Again, let me acknowledge that PAGE is built on top of Visual Tcl.
Without that work I would not have known how to get started.

George Tellalov introduced me to relative placement and made numerous
helpful suggestions.

Guilherme Polo did a marvelous job implementing and documenting Pyttk.
He helped me understand several of the new ttk widgets and showed how
to easily build scrolled versions of them.  His documentation
convinced me to use Sphinx for the PAGE documentation.

I would like to thank Greg Walters especially for writing a series of
articles on Python programming that include two on PAGE and for his
encouraging me to get the Alias feature working correctly. (See
below for references and URL's.)  I borrowed from his article the code
for busy cursors included as a sample above. This year, 2018, he wrote
a tutorial for learning PAGE which is included in the documentation
directory, "/page/docs/tutorial". He has also been a continuous font
of good ideas.

I would like to acknowledge the work of Kent Fox in aiding testing of
PAGE on three systems and bringing to light several bugs.

I borrowed the ColorDlg.tcl color picker from  `Le site de Jack
<http://http://jack.r.free.fr/index.php?lng=en&page=colordlg>`_. I
found it very satisfactory and give my thanks.

Also borrowed was ColorExplorer written by William J. Poser.

Alexander Walters suggested the code for importing the tkinter and ttk
modules adopted in PAGE 4.1.

Sam Manzi made numerous helpful suggestions and helped test recent
versions of PAGE.

Many people have reported bugs and made suggestions. Piero Ronchi and
Paul Kreiger have been especially helpful. In addition, Paul Kreiger
donated a set of PAGE icons and a canvas example.
 

Bob Stanton suggested displaying both the GUI module and the Support
module in separate Python Consoles and also firing up an IDE with the
two modules. Both were excellent ideas and so implemented.

Maksim Korzh was the inspiration and implementer of the main feature
of version 4.10 - the inclusion of the PNotebook feature which is the
notebook widget with builtin tab closing. I find the Ttk style
mystifying and undocumented; I would never have figured it out.

Steffen Illhardt helped me to better understand encoding issues
involved when transferring files between different countries and
operating systems and he also provided the code changes to PAGE which
reduces the problem.

Documentation
-------------

One problem that many people must encounter when trying to use Tkinter
with python is locating adequate documentation.  I relied heavily on
Grayson's book particularly to see how to map the various tcl calls
and configuration options into python calls and for descriptions of
the available functions.  I would have gotten nowhere without this
reference.  Unfortunately, Grayson predated the ttk widget set by
several years.

Another extremely helpful reference is: `An Introduction to Tkinter by
Fredrik Lundh
<http://www.pythonware.com/library/tkinter/introduction/index.htm>`_.

Several years ago, Greg Walters published several great articles on
using PAGE. They are now somewhat out of date but he has written a really good
Tutorial which can be found in the "page/docs/tutorial" subdirectory
along with his sample code. His long series of articles on Python
programming are available via his new web site
`TheDesignatedGeek <http://thedesignatedgeek.xyz/>`_.

I have also found `Tkinter 8.5 reference: a GUI for Python
<http://infohost.nmt.edu/tcc/help/pubs/tkinter/web/index.html>`_ by
John W. Shipman from New Mexico Tech helpful on many occasions.

See also http://effbot.org which contains hundreds of articles on
Python and related technologies (including PIL, ElementTree, Tkinter,
and other extensions). I have used this reference repeatedly.

For Tcl/Tk documentation visit: `Tcl Developer Site
<http://tcl.activestate.com>`_.

A very useful Tk tutorial with information about ttk widgets and styles
is `TkDocs <http://www.tkdocs.com/tutorial/index.html>`_.
 
Since some people find Python Lambda usage confusing, Grant Hilebrand
suggested including a reference to the excellent tutorial at
https://pythonconquerstheuniverse.wordpress.com/2011/08/29/lambda_tutorial/. 

Unfortunately, there is no useful documentation for Visual Tcl like so
many Open Source projects.

I have recently turned on a discussion forum on the SourceForge
summary page `General Discussion
<https://sourceforge.net/p/page/discussion/?source=navbar>`_.

For information on sharing variables and functions between Python
modules see is how to share global variables across module. A
good reference is `How do I share global variables across modules?
<http://effbot.org/pyfaq/how-do-i-share-global-variables-across-modules.htm>`_.

Reporting Problems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I really welcome the reporting of problems; that is the only way I can
catch many of them. When reporting problems to "Don dot Rozenberg at
gmail dot com" please include the following:

* The version number of PAGE.

* The OS you are using.

* When PAGE dies it often shows an Error window which has a Trace back
  Button, which if selected produces a separate window containing a
  trace back of PAGE indicating the offending or offended code. Please
  if possible, send me a screen capture of that window.  

* If possible the tcl file that caused the error. Even better would be
  a simple case causing the same error.

If your subject contains the word PAGE, my email reader will place the
message in a separate folder where I will see it sooner.  
