								   
Module Structure
================

PAGE generates two modules, The GUI module, and the Support
Module. The first contains all of the Python code necessary to plop
the GUI window onto the computer screen. In my vision of the PAGE
world, the GUI module is not to be edited. It contains all of the
required linkage to the Support module.  It is generally the main
module of the application.

The Support module is generated in skeletal form and is the framework
upon which the application is built. It is where the user written code
resides.  As such it is infrequently generated or replaced by PAGE. In
fact, the separation is the secret of rework; it allows changes
to the content and appearance of the GUI window while preserving the 
user's code. 

When the modules are generated they are displayed in the Python
Console but not saved automatically. This gives the user an
opportunity to inspect the code and decide whether to save. When PAGE
generates a module, it uses four spaces for indentation. When PAGE
saves a module, spaces are saved as spaces.

Project Directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The directory containing the various files associated with PAGE is
called the project directory. It contains the project file, the
generate Python modules, any image files used with widgets, and any
application support modules.

Let me call the project directory "proj_dir", because it is precise
and corresponds to an internal PAGE variable. proj_dir is set several
ways:

+ If PAGE is executed without an arguments, proj_dir is set to the
  current working directory.

+ If PAGE is called with an argument, proj_dir is set to the current
  working directory joined to the directory portion of the argument.

+ If the GUI design created with PAGE is saved, the destination
  directory becomes the proj_dir.

+ If a project file is opened, the source directory becomes the
  proj_dir.

This is important when widgets have image attributes. To keep such
cases reasonable sane, PAGE requires that all image files associated
with such widgets reside within the proj_dir or a subdirectory of it
prior to the specification of the widget.

I recommend that before executing PAGE, a directory be created and
that directory be made the current working directory. Image files need
not be included before beginning the GUI development, but need to
included before widgets specify non-blank image attributes. Again, you
can add a widget that might include an image but the image file must
be included before specified the image attribute.

GUI Module
~~~~~~~~~~

The main feature of the GUI module is the class definition, which
defines a GUI window.  It defines the top level window and all of the
contained widgets.  Note that it refers to all callback functions as
functions in the support module and that Tk variables such as
textvariables are referred to Tk variables in the support module.

The GUI module contains two stylized function for instantiating the
window class. The first is:

.. sourcecode:: python

    def vp_start_gui():
   	    '''Starting point when module is the main routine.'''
    	global val, w, root
    	root = Tk()
    	top = New_Toplevel_1 (root)
    	fnew_support.init(root, top)
    	root.mainloop()

which is the entry point when starting the routine as the main routine
of the application as seen at the bottom of the module:

.. sourcecode:: python
 
    if __name__ == '__main__':
       vp_start_gui()
	   

The main thing about the function vp_start_gui  is that it initializes
Tk and establishes the Tkinter mainloop.   Note that the init function in
the support module is passed  pointer to the GUI window class.


The other function is:


.. sourcecode:: python

    def create_New_Toplevel_1(root, *args, **kwargs):
        '''Starting point when module is imported by another
        program.'''
        global w, w_win, rt
    	rt = root
    	w = Toplevel (root)
    	top = New_Toplevel_1 (w)
    	fnew_support.init(w, top, *args, **kwargs)
    	return (w, top)

which is the entry point when ate GUI window is invoked from code
within the running application, for instance, if a secondary GUI such as
a progress bar is desired for some action triggered in the main
GUI. Notice that it does not call Tk() nor start a mainloop; you only
want one of those.  A big point is that the init function is passed a
variable argument list in the name of flexibility.  It is also passed
a pointer to the GUI window. This is done so that the user can close 
the created window in its support module without closing affecting
other windows in the application.

Support Module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This module is home of the hand coded portion of the application.
Obviously, PAGE can only prepare a framework for the application. What
PAGE knows about are, (1) the linkage between the GUI module and the
support module, (2) the callback functions to be located in the
Support module, and (3) the Tk variables which are to be manipulated
in the support module.

For linkage between the modules is mainly the init function.

.. sourcecode:: python

    def init(top, gui, *args, **kwargs):
        global w, top_level, root
        w = gui
        top_level = top
        root = top

Here PAGE merely generates the bare minimum. It sets global variables
which refer to the root of the GUI window and w which points to the
GUI window created by the corresponding GUI module.  The latter allows
the user to change configuration of the GUI window and of widget
contained in the window. For instance if there is a button (Button1)
in the GUI window, the color may be changed anywhere in the support
module simply with the following code:


.. sourcecode:: python

   w.Button1.configure(color='red')

Also, if there is hierarchy of modules or routines flowing from the
support module, then the reference to the GUI window can be passed
along and manipulated.

The generated code for the callback functions is even simpler:

 
.. sourcecode:: python

    def callback():
    	print('unknown_support.callback')
    	sys.stdout.flush()



Code generated for the Tk variable kkkk looks like:


.. sourcecode:: python

    def set_Tk_var():
       # These are Tk variables used passed to Tkinter and must be
       # defined before the widgets using them are created.
       global kkkk
       kkkk = StringVar()


The code generated as above is so generated so that the GUI module and
the support module will be an executable pair.  That is, you can
execute the GUI module and see what it will look like even though you
have put in no additional application code. If the GUI invokes a
callback, say by a button select, the program will tell you that it
was invoked. Now you have a leg up, go program.


What if after you have written a substantial body of application code,
and discover that you need an additional widget in the GUI module;
what to do?

First invoke PAGE with the project name, add the widget with all its
configuration including callbacks and Tk variables. Then generate
Python code for the GUI module just like before.  You sure do not want
to rebuild the support module anew and erase all of your hand code.
So when you tell PAGE to generate your support module, it gives you
the option of updating the existing support module. If selected, PAGE
will merely add skeletons for the new callbacks and add the new Tk
variables.  In addition, it will backup the previous version of the
modules in case of failure or PAGE bugs. etc..  PAGE will keep backups
to a depth specified in the preferences.  See :ref:`backup preferences <backup>`.

As a convenience, the following code is added at the bottom of the
support module to aid in debugging.  I you are debugging the support
module and want to test its execution, you can just execute it and it
will not start by invoking a functions within the support module but
rather the main function in the GUI module.  I found it particularly
useful since I do my development in emacs where I have a key binding
which will invoke python to execute the current buffer.

.. sourcecode:: python

	 if __name__ == '__main__':
     	 import bind_example
    	 bind_example.vp_start_gui()


Some of these features are further explored in :ref:`Applications with Multiple Top-Level Windows`.

