	.. _Preferences:

Defaults and Preferences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Early in the development of PAGE, I considered dropping completely the
preference stuff derived from Virtual Tcl primarily because many of
the preferences were related to functions that do not have meaning for
PAGE.  However, I really disliked the gray background in PAGE and
wanted to change it to my favorite background color - wheat.  Also, I
felt that capability should be shared with the users. Having made that
decision, I saw that it was then a small step to consider allowing the user to
have one color scheme for running PAGE, while generating a Python GUI
with a different color scheme.  A similar progression of thoughts has
occurred with respect to fonts; it started because the default fonts
are too small for my elderly eyes.  So one thing leads to another and
it became a question of where to stop.  In version 4.0 I am
implementing color schemes consisting of foreground and background
colors as well as separate fonts for PAGE and the generated GUI.  I am
also trying to provide reasonable highlight coloring.  I try to
provide helpful information in the generated code so that you will be
able to see what I am trying to do and thus be able to customize your
results.

An addition argument for manipulating colors is that by
not exploiting colors, one is not really exploiting Tk. Not
really understanding ttk styles at all well, I ask that if you find
better ways or even a way of doing something which eludes me, please
let me know, I will be happy to use it, and secondly, hating to try
imposing my stylistic tastes, I again welcome comments.  Also let me
say, I have done most of my development and testing with light colors,
in particular the color wheat. That means that things can be expected
to work better with light colors.  I have also tested and tried to
make things work with a blue background and white foreground.

Let me clarify what is meant by defaults and preferences
here. Defaults are built-in attribute values which will be used for
colors, background and foreground, and font selection and sizes unless
the PAGE user sets them specifically for individual GUI widgets.
Defaults also include colors and fonts to be used by PAGE in
displaying its interface windows.  Preferences are user specified
overrides for some of the attributes used throughout by PAGE.
Individual widget attributes can be changed using the Attribute
Editor.

Defaults can be derived from several sources.  First, if nothing else
is done, then the small gray world of Tk defaults prevail.  These
defaults may be overridden by values in the .pagerc file which was
saved from previous executions of PAGE where user preferences for the
default values were made and saved.  Those saved preferences can
always be respecified and saved.  The third source of overriding GUI
defaults comes into play when the PAGE user specifies or opens an
existing generated GUI ".tcl" file. In that case the defaults for
further GUI development match those in effect when the file was saved.
That is, when you open up an existing GUI ".tcl" for further
development PAGE will use the GUI defaults that were in effect at the
earlier time when the GUI was created, while PAGE ignores current
default settings. This third way is a version 4.0 enhancement.

Note that .pagrc is an editable text file; although I have edited it
on occasion, that should not be necessary and can cause problems -
that is what the Preferences Windows are for.

Confusion stems from at least two sources.  First, there is really two
sets of preferences, (1) those for the PAGE program, and (2) the
preferences to be used for the generated GUI.  Another source is that
there are multiple ways of specifying preferences within the Tk
environment. In the case of ttk widgets, one must use Themes and
Styles to manipulate colors and fonts but, unfortunately, there are a
number of aspects which are undocumented, complementing some serious
shortcomings in the implementation or design of the ttk code.  Through
experimentation and googling I have found some things that work. Once
again, I received tremendous help from Guilherme Polo in solving
important questions in my use of ttk styles. Even now there are some
disturbing artifacts in PAGE associated with my implementation. Again,
suggestions welcome.

There is no doubt, that things will be easier for the user if he
sticks with the defaults.  But then one is stuck with a dull gray
world with small print on Linux and Microsoft PC's. (I think that the
Tk default gray is #d9d9d9 also known as the X11 color gray9.) 

Lets start with the easy preferences. PAGE has several simple
preferences such as whether on not to use automatically generated
aliases or relative placement (see :ref:`relative`) and the
granularity of the grid upon which a widget is placed. Those are easy
and could even be dropped as user settable options. They were
included when new features were added to PAGE but now I am almost
excursively sticking with the new features and rarely test whether the
older stuff still works correctly. So I recommend that you stick with
the initial settings.  Recently, a user pointed me to a problem with
Relative Placement and so I went back and did some additional testing
and debugging with absolute placement and so I feel more confident
with absolute placement. (If you uncheck the item "Generate Python
with relative placement" you get absolute placement.) At the same time
I generated a hack which lessen the relative placement problem with
label frames.

The option dealing with :ref:`default origin <origin>` is one
where the user actually might or might not want, so it really belongs
as a preference.

Following a user request that PAGE test whether an identifier is a
legal Python identifier, I implemented a test of whether an identifier
is a legal Python 2 identifier (see :ref:`naming`). You can select this
testing in the Preferences window. PAGE checks command entries for
command attributes as well as for validatecommand and invalidcommand
options. If an entry has bad syntax the code generation stops, the
Python console closes, and the offending widget is selected.

Preferences are tougher in the case of the GUI because one is choosing
default values which may not be available to the user of the generated
application when the application is executed on a different operating
system from the development system. The same fonts and colors might
not be available on both systems.  You might accept some defaults with
respect to PAGE, but really want control over things like colors and
fonts to be used in your application.  I am doing my development work
on Linux and am oriented toward that operating system.

Finally, I have the question as to which defaults I set before you
have made any preferences known.  Although I do not like them, I have
set up PAGE to use Tk default colors and fonts. That is, PAGE uses as
the default background for ttk widgets - #d9d9d9. So select
File->Preferences and make the program behave best for you.

Note that when one makes changes in the Preferences, they are
committed when one selects the check mark in the upper right. At the
same time they are written to the .pagerc file to be utilized the next
time the user invokes PAGE.  If the user wants to abandon actions
taken in the Preferencs window, he selects the stylized "x" next to
the check and the whole window disappears and nothing is saved.  In
PAGE several variables derived from the preferences are set at the
initiation of the program. If you want to change preferences, I
definitely recommend opening PAGE, making your changes, saving them by
selecting the check mark, and then exiting PAGE.  When you restart they
should be in effect.

One gotcha remains.  If you start a project where you specified one
color scheme and saved the project in the GUI ".tcl" file, then
changed a color or font preference and then reloaded the tcl file you
will find that the original color and font preferences are still in
effect; they are saved within the ".tcl". I emphasize this because I
have been caught by it.

One further point is that you may run into problems when upgrading to
version 4.0 if you do not erase the ".pagerc" file as part of the
installation.

As of version 4.17, there is a preference which allows the user to
specify the indentation width in spaces. This is like specifying tab
width but PAGE does not use tabs for storing Python files.  Again,
Python modules will be saved using spaces. The default for the
indentation width is four spaces. Like other preferences this
preference is stored in the ".pagerc" file.

In version 4.21, balloon help (tooltipips) was implemented and the
default font is tiny, so a preference has been added for specifying a
tooltipip font.

In version 4.22, a preference was add for specifying the Python
command for execution in the Python Console. Basically, it allows one
to choose between Python 2 or Python 3 as the interpreter invoked when
the Run button is selected.

.. _backup:

In version 4.23, a preference was added for specifying the number of
level of back files to be retained as an integer. Blank or zero means
no backup will be retained.

Again, changing preferences during a session can lead to unexpected
results. Invoke PAGE, change preferences, and exit. Further changing
preferences after a project is first saved will retain the GUI
preferences in effect at the first save thorough out further sessions
involving that project.

Preferences Windows
```````````````````

When you go to File->Preferences in the main PAGE menu you bring up a
the Preferences notebook window with three pages.  The Basics page:

.. image:: basics.png

This page allows one to make several miscellaneous preference
choices. My recommendation is that they be left the way they
are. Relative placement and aliases are described elsewhere in this
document.

Color Preferences
`````````````````


.. image:: colors.png 

The top section deals with colors displayed while executing PAGE. The
most important is the PAGE Background Color which is the background
color for all the PAGE windows. One makes a new selection by invoking
the :ref:`color_dialog` by selecting the "Browse colors ..." button to
the right of the page. This open the Color Dialog and one can set the
color as described above.  To go back to the default color, select the
"Default Color" button.

The next row allows the user to set the foreground color, that is
necessary in case he selects a dark background such as dark blue.  In
that case, a light colored foreground color should be chosen.

In a similar vein, one wants a visible distinction for the widget tree
highlight.  That shows which widget has been chosen in the GUI under
construction.

For GUI colors, it is much the same as above.  I have not seen a
requirement for specifying a default highlight color.  If that is
necessary please let me know and I will see if I can implement it in a
future version.  I have wanted to have the menu in the top level
window be in a distinctive color band so I support that feature.

Font Preferences
````````````````




.. image:: fonts.png


Since my eyes require large fonts like 16 point fonts, I can set the
PAGE default font which catches most of the right things.  For the
Python Console window I want a big bold font; that is the PAGE fixed
width font.

The GUI fonts are more numerous. In addition to the ones above, one
can specify the text font which is used in widgets like text boxes and
list boxes.  Again, I allow one to specify a menu font which is
different from the default.

One question I had related to the choice of fonts for text boxes.
Should the font be the text font or fixed width font?  If one wants to
build an editor in a text box as is the case with the PAGE Python
Console, then a fixed width font is desired, but if one wants to
display something like a help message then a variable width font is
more appropriate.  What I did for PAGE was use the GUI text font for
text boxes and the GUI fixed width font for list boxes.  In truth,
good arguments for using all three fonts for list boxes can be made.

Fonts have caused me much anguish and confusion.  One may pick a font
which works well on the system where PAGE is hosted.  Then one could
build a GUI which would call for specific fonts which are not
available on the target system. If you know what fonts are available
on the target system you can pick the fonts you like. Tk encapsulates
a set of standard fonts that are always available, and of course the
standard widgets use these fonts. This helps abstract away platform
differences.  The predefined fonts are:

     * TkDefaultFont	The default for all GUI items not otherwise specified.
     * TkTextFont	Used for entry widgets, listboxes, etc.
     * TkFixedFont	A standard fixed-width font.
     * TkMenuFont	The font used for menu items.
     * TkHeadingFont	The font typically used for column headings in lists and tables.
     * TkCaptionFont	A font for window and dialog caption bars.
     * TkSmallCaptionFont	A smaller caption font for subwindows or tool dialogs
     * TkIconFont	A font for icon captions.
     * TkTooltipFont	A font for tooltips.

The following python program (Python 3) will display the characteristics of the
default fonts:
 
.. sourcecode:: python



	import tkinter
	import tkinter.font

	root = tkinter.Tk()

	fonts = tkinter.font.names()

	for font in fonts:
		print("\n%s" % font)
		config = root.tk.call("font", "configure", font)
		print(config)
	


It may also be the case that if a chosen font is not available on the
target system then one of these fonts may be used.  I can't tell from
the documentation.  The preferences window allows one to specify the
default fonts used in the generated GUI. To avoid too much gilding of
the lily, I have allowed the user to specify only the first four as
well as the text font for the Scrolledtreeview widget. If
you try different fonts for one of the defaults and then want to
return to the true default such as TkFixedFont for the text widgets,specified
there is a button for that.

You can specify a default font to be used and still specify different
non-default fonts for any individual widget. For instance, you can use
TkMenuFont for a Button widget if you want or in my case a 14 point
font.  There seems to be another weirdness in Tk to be avoided and
that is you can change the family, size, weight, etc. of the defaults
fonts; at least I have not made that easy.

If you are going to be using the GUI application on the system hosting
PAGE by all means select defaults that meet you requirements.  But
remember those fonts may not be there if the GUI executes on a
different system. In which case, the Tk will pick defaults for you and
that may not be what you want.

If a default font is active for a widget, it will appear in the
Attribute Editor with the default name such as TkMenuFont but if you
select the adjoining ellipsis key the font will be changed to a new
font with the characteristics specified by family, size, weight, etc..
That may not be what you want, in which case you can replace the font
name with the default font name.

On Fonts tab of the Preferences window a font selection has been added
for the font to be used with the Treeview widget.  The default font
here is TkDefaultFont.

Be aware that selecting one of the Tk predefined fonts is different
from selecting the corresponding description. For instance, the font
description of TkDefaultFont is:

* ('-family', 'sans-serif', '-size', -12, '-weight', 'normal', '-slant', 'roman', '-underline', 0, '-overstrike', 0)


on my Linux system, while on Windows 10 the
TkDefaultFont is:

* ('-family', 'Segoe UI', '-size', 9, '-weight', 'normal', '-slant',
  'roman', '-underline', 0, '-overstrike', 0).

If you use the font description
instead of "TkDefaultFont" everything will look fine. If you go to
another system which does not have the "san-serif" font family things
may look different from the TkDefaultFont on that system.


Profile and Themes
``````````````````
As mentioned above, the usual behavior is for the .pagerc file to be
opened as an initialization file. It contains information regarding
color schemes, font preferences, window locations, and other
preference information. Were I an expansive individual, I might call
it a theme.  I do call it an rc file, a name hallowed in Unix
mythology. Perhaps better, it can be called the "profile". Normally, the default location of the rc file is the users
home directory. This is the case if the user has defined the HOME
environmental variable.  In the absence of the HOME environmental
variable, the location is the location of the page script. So Windows
users hop to and define the HOME environmental variable!

Recently, PAGE added the capability of specifying the rc file or
profile to be used in the page command with the -p parameter. For
example:

.. sourcecode:: python

   page -p <rc_file>

or for Windows users:

.. sourcecode:: python
   
	winpage "-p <rc_file>"       

where <rc_file> is the profile file relative to the HOME directory if
specified or the page script location.
	
Caution
```````
One must be careful in changing many of the preferences in the middle
of a session or in the middle of creating a project.
