.. _styles:

Styles and Themes
-----------------

My understanding is that the motivation and attraction of ttk is that
one may compose a GUI and it will look "normal" when run in any of the
common OS's - Linux, UNIX, Windows, or OS X.
Also, it is possible to create new themes which are more pleasing for
a more modern appearance of a GUI. However, I think ttk is a mess in
terms of architecture, implementation, and especially documentation.
However, there are several much needed widgets available in ttk including
ttk::notebook, ttk::progressbar, ttk::treeview, ttk::panedwindow,
ttk::separator, and ttk::sizegrip. PAGE supports those ttk widgets as well
as a few others. To get a better appreciation of some of the
difficulties in working with styles and themes, see
https://tkdocs.com/tutorial/styles.html#whydifficult. 

So what I have tried to do is manipulate the Themes and Styles in a
way that the PAGE user can mix ttk widgets with tk widgets and have a
consistent appearance. This is very much a case of evolving
understanding and appreciation. This usage of Themes and styles is
different from orthodox usage which would replace tk widgets with ttk
widgets but it seems to work pretty well as shown by :ref:`widgetdemo`.

This is an area that remains confusing to me.  If one is interested
using a GUI color scheme different for the default gray for Linux and
MS, then one has to confront Styles.  I was unable to make much
progress until I received a great deal of help from Guilherme Polo
which got me to the point I am at now.  I am not sure that I have
found the best approach or even a
particularly good way of achieving my results.  So I have tried to
make style commands as clear as possible so that the user can
understand what I have done.  If a user
knows a better way of doing this please let me know and I shall try to
incorporate it in a future release. Also, Maksim Korzh was
instrumental in providing the Style coding for the PNotebook widget.


First I would like to automatically generate code for the user which
would follow his color scheme.
Consider the following code for a GUI window that contains a tabbed
notebook with a background color of wheat:

.. sourcecode:: python

    def __init__(self, master=None):
        _bgcolor = 'wheat'  # X11 color: #f5deb3
        _fgcolor = '#000000'  # X11 color: 'black'
        _compcolor = '#b2c9f4' # Closest X11 color: 'SlateGray2'
        _ana1color = '#eaf4b2' # Closest X11 color: '{pale goldenrod}'
        _ana2color = 'beige' # X11 color: #f5f5dc
        _tabfg1 = 'black'
        _tabfg2 = 'black'
        _tabbg1 = 'grey75'
        _tabbg2 = 'grey89'
        _bgmode = 'light'
        font10 = "-family {DejaVu Sans} -size 14 -weight normal -slant roman -underline 0 -overstrike 0"
        self.style = ttk.Style()
        if sys.platform == "win32":
            self.style.theme_use('winnative')
        self.style.configure('.',background=_bgcolor)
        self.style.configure('.',foreground=_fgcolor)
        self.style.configure('.',font=font10)
        self.style.map('.',background=
            [('selected', _compcolor), ('active',_ana2color)])
        master.configure(background=_bgcolor)


        self.style.configure('TNotebook.Tab',background=_bgcolor)
        self.style.configure('TNotebook.Tab',foreground=_fgcolor)
        self.style.map('TNotebook.Tab',background=
            [('selected', _compcolor), ('active',_ana2color)])
        self.TNotebook1 = ttk.Notebook(master)
        self.TNotebook1.place(relx=0.28,rely=0.16,relheight=0.51,relwidth=0.5)
        self.TNotebook1.configure(width=300)
        self.TNotebook1.configure(takefocus="")
        self.TNotebook1_pg0 = ttk.Frame(self.TNotebook1)
        self.TNotebook1.add(self.TNotebook1_pg0, padding=3)
        self.TNotebook1.tab(0, text="Page 1",underline="-1",)
        self.TNotebook1_pg1 = ttk.Frame(self.TNotebook1)
        self.TNotebook1.add(self.TNotebook1_pg1, padding=3)
        self.TNotebook1.tab(1, text="Page 2",underline="-1",)


The first group of statements in __init__define define the default GUI
colors and the default GUI fonts. These setting come directly from the
user's preference choices. I added the comments to the color
statements so that the user would have a little clearer picture was to
what was going on.  Similarly, there are several different ways to
specify fonts and I think that the string format that I used may be
the clearest for the user to understand and modify.  The complementary
color and the two analog colors were calculated from algorithms found
on the net.  I have included as comments the names of the closest or
exact X11 color. Also, if the color is specified by the X11 name a
comment contains the hex value.

.. sourcecode:: python

        _bgcolor = 'wheat' # RGV value #f5deb3
        _fgcolor = '#000000' # Closest X11 color: 'black'
        _compcolor = '#b2c9f4' # Closest X11 color: 'SlateGray2'
        _ana1color = '#eaf4b2' # Closest X11 color: '{pale goldenrod}'
        _ana2color = '#f4bcb2' # Closest X11 color: 'RosyBrown2'
        font10 = "-family {DejaVu Sans} -size 14 -weight normal -slant roman -underline 0 -overstrike 0"


The next group of statements obtain the ttk
style in use and set the background and foreground color defaults for
ttk as well as colors for highlight and active colors.


.. sourcecode:: python

        self.style = ttk.Style()
        if sys.platform == "win32":
            self.style.theme_use('winnative')
        self.style.configure('.',background=_bgcolor)
        self.style.configure('.',foreground=_fgcolor)
        self.style.configure('.',font=font10)
        self.style.map('.',background=
            [('selected', _compcolor), ('active',_ana2color)])




This will handle most of the color setting for ttk but not all of
them.  I expected that all the style configuration in ttk would be
inherited from the '.' object; that seems not to be the case. Notice
that the second and third lines of code above cause the "winnative"
theme to be used when the code is run under Windows.

The following fixes the background color of the Toplevel window. 

.. sourcecode:: python

        top.configure(background=_bgcolor)
        top.configure(highlightbackground="wheat")
        top.configure(highlightcolor="black")

Since the tabbed notebook is in use, we encounter one of the ttk
"exceptions" - colors for notebook tabs.  Hence, the following code:


.. sourcecode:: python

           _compcolor = '#b2c9f4' # Closest X11 color: 'SlateGray2'
           _ana1color = '#eaf4b2' # Closest X11 color: '{pale goldenrod}' 
           _ana2color = '#f4bcb2' # Closest X11 color: 'RosyBrown2' 

I came across some code which purports to calculate the complement and
analogs of a color and used that to calculate the above colors.  I also
used similar code to translate the RGB coding to the name of the
closest X11 color so that the user can get some idea of the color and
easily change them if desired.

.. Next comes one of the special cases, note book tabs.  Here I have
.. specified background and foreground colors for the tabs since they are
.. not inherited from the "." ttk object.

.. .. sourcecode:: python

..           self.style.configure('TNotebook.Tab',background=_bgcolor)
..           self.style.configure('TNotebook.Tab',foreground=_fgcolor)

and finally I make the color of the selected tab the complement of the
background color as defined above, and the color of the tab under the
mouse one of the analog colors from above.  This is sort of automating
the theme color selection and I really don't want to do that.  It just
seemed necessary to compete the task.  I hope the user is able to
derive from the example, the changes he wishes to make.

.. sourcecode:: python

           self.style.map('TNotebook.Tab',background=
               [('selected', _compcolor), ('active',_ana2color)])

The above shows the code I added to make the notebook widget look
consistent. Similar tricks can be seen for treeview widgets,
scrollbars, labeled frames, etc.  Again, if you see better or clearer
ways of handling style components please let me know.


I did all of my development work on Linux.  As an illustration of the
same PAGE-generated GUI running under different systems, let me
present the following screens shots of vrex.py (vrex is one of the
examples discussed later in the examples section):

.. image:: vrex-linux.png

Above: Running vrex running on Linux.  This is what I built using PAGE
on Linux..



.. image:: vrex-windows10.png


Above: Running vrex running on Windows 10 using the "winnative"
theme. This looks pretty good except for the background color in the
menubar and the sizegrep. 

.. image:: vrex-osx.jpg

Above: Running vrex running on OS X.


As one can see there are differences in appearance but on the whole it
seems to work reasonable well for this example.  That is fortunate
because the main feature of the example is the use of paned windows
and scrolled text widgets and they are certainly important for GUI
building. 


I concluded that it would be better if I generated code which forces
the "winnative" theme when the generated GUI is run on Windows.  It
seems preferable to me to have the sizegrip with an incorrect
background but a better rendering of the notebook widget than the
other way around.  Any comments, help, or suggestions will be very
welcome.

From the above and similar experiences, for my own use, I avoid ttk
widgets which are also implemented as tk widgets such as buttons,
labels, frames, checkboxs, and radiobuttons,  but use
notebook, paned window, progress bar, and treeview, because of their
convenience. I intend to keep looking at the ttk problems and if I can
learn how to avoid them I will certainly do so.



